Doc tabstop clarify (#17381)
vim/vim: runtime/doc/usr_30.txt

VARIABLE TAB STOPS

As we said before, the ASCII table was designed to remotely control
teleprinters.  A given teleprinter could be configured to have their physical
tab stops have variable spacing.  After all, the ^I control character was
only stipulating: go to the next tab stop wherever it is.
  Vim 7.3 introduced 'vartabstop' to emulate the same functionality.  For
example if Vim was compiled with `+vartabs` and `:set vartabstop=2,4` one gets

	actual character	result ~
	^I			->
	^I^I			->--->
	^I^I^I			->--->--->

  Similarly, 'varsofttabstop' was also introduced, to have variably spaced
soft tab stops.  With `:set varsofttabstop=2,4` one gets

	type			  result ~
	<Tab>			  ..
	<Tab><Tab>		  ......
	<Tab><Tab><Tab>		  ------->....

EXAMPLES OF CONFIGURATION

By default, Vim is configured to use only tabs: >

	:set tabstop=8
	:set shiftwidth=8
	:set noexpandtab
	:set softtabstop=0
	:set nosmarttab
<
  If you want to write C code as if it were Python (only spaces, with indents
of 4 spaces), here is what you can use: >

	:set shiftwidth=4
	:set softtabstop=-1
	:set expandtab
<
  You would like the same behaviour as above, but on top of that you would

> also like the ability to finely align code?  You can use: >

Reviewer: Perhaps this is slightly better?
If you want the same behavior but with better control over alignment (e.g. lining up parameters or comments in multiples of 2 spaces), use:

Author: I agree. Change done.

this was not the default everywhere.  Everytime text was displayed with the
wrong 'tabstop' value, it would ruin the alignment of the text.
  In the meantime, computers got much better and the few octets saved by using
tabs was no longer making any real difference.  It became possible to use only
spaces and thus guarantee the same resulting text everywhere.  But using only
spaces was impossible in `vi` without sacrificing features.  Remember that
'autoindent' would systematically try to input a tab character when it could.
  So in Vim 4.0 introduced the 'expantab' option.  When set, Vim will replace
any horizontal tab character that it would normally insert with an equivalent
number of spaces, to end up with the same visual effect. <BS> would continue
to remove only one character at a time.

	type				result ~
	<Tab>				........
	<Tab><BS>			.......

CHANGING TABS IN SPACES (AND BACK)

Setting 'expandtab' does not immediately affect existing tab characters.
Vim will occasionally convert a tab character to spaces while rewriting
the indent of a line.
  In order to purge a file from all its horizontal tab characters, Vim 5.3

> introduced the |:retab| command.  Use these commands: >

Reviewer 2: The next (not updated) paragraph is misleading (line 508):

>	:set expandtab
>	:%retab
>
> Now Vim will have changed all indents to use spaces instead of tabs.  However,
> all tabs that come after a non-blank character are kept.  If you want these to
> be converted as well, add a !: >
>
>	:%retab!

With `:set expandtab` on, both `:retab` and `:retab!` substitute  
spaces for *all* tabs (note the absence of a range qualifier;  
see `:help :retab`).

Author: True! Changes done.

same was true for <BS>.

THE ISSUE WITH TABS AND INDENTATION

In Vim, the number of columns between two (virtual) horizontal tab stops
is controlled by 'tabstop' and is set to eight by default.  Although you can
change it, you quickly run into trouble later.  Other programs won't know what
tabstop value you used.  They probably use the default value of eight, and
your text suddenly looks very different.  Also, most printers use a fixed
tabstop value of eight.  Thus it's best to keep 'tabstop' alone; if you edit a
file which was written with a different tabstop setting, see |25.3| for how
to fix that.
   For indenting lines in a program, using a multiple of eight columns makes
you quickly run into the right border of the window.  Using a single space
doesn't provide enough visual difference.  Many people prefer to use four
spaces, a good compromise.
   Since a tab character at the beginning of a line is visually represented
as eight spaces and you want to use an indent of four spaces, you can't use a
tab character to make your indent.
  To remedy this, `vi` had the 'shiftwidth' option.  When set to 4, on a new

> line, pressing <C-t> would indent the line by 4 spaces, a result impossible

Reviewer: ```suggestion
line, pressing <C-t> in Insert mode would indent the line by 4 spaces, a result impossible
```

to get with the <Tab> key and 'tabstop' set to 8.  To optimize space, `vi`
would also silently remove packs of spaces and replace them with tab
characters.  The following shows what happens pressing <C-t> a few times.
A "." stands for a space character and "------->" for a tab character.

	type				result ~
	<C-t>				....
	<C-t><C-t>			------->
	<C-t><C-t><C-t>			------->....

Similarly with `set tabstop=8 shiftwidth=2` one has

	type				result ~
	<C-t><Tab><C-t>			..----->..

> 	<C-t><Tab><C-t><C-d>		------->

Reviewer: Note: typing <c-d> in Insert mode decreases the indent by one shiftwidth value.

Author: I am grateful to ChatGPT, who could see the invisible `<C-d>` in your comment :-)
I have added the note in the text.

A third option that one could set in `vi` was 'autoindent'.  It copies the
indent level of the previous lines, 

	type				result ~
	<Space><Tab>hello		.------>hello
	<Space><Tab>hello<Enter>	.------>hello
					------->

but the new line is produced by optimizing the number of characters used.

JUST SPACES

But using the Horizontal Tab control character to save up space came with
a drawback.  Although tab stops were supposed to be separated by 8 columns,
this was not the default everywhere.  Everytime text was displayed with the
wrong 'tabstop' value, it would ruin the alignment of the text.
  In the meantime, computers got much better and the few octets saved by using
tabs was no longer making any real difference.  It became possible to use only

> spaces and thus guarantee the same resulting text everywhere.  But using only

Reviewer 2: It is not only more bytes to store for space indented text,  
it is also more time to spend by parsers etc. reading a byte  
at a time with no native compilation or bytecode translation  
to follow in sight.

Tabs are still expected in Make recipes by default.

I think, it is best to avoid picking a team tabs or a team  
spaces when listing capabilities of a general purpose editor  
that goes out of its way to accommodate tabs and spaces all  
the same.

Author: I fully agree with each of your three paragraphs.

My goal in rewriting that section was to take the new user through the history of the options that were added one by one; it is history that explains how Vim behaves today and why we end up with so many different options to just ‘deal with tabs’.
I kept the original direction of the previous author of the section : ‘do everything you can to keep ts=8’. I felt this was one of the clearest ways to explain how and why features developed in Vim.

But this moto of `ts=8` hides the modern use that programmers intend with tabs. In particular, I have in mind what the creators of Go explained. They standardized on tabs so that every programmer could set `ts` to their preferred value. I preferred to avoid talking about this, since it does not help understand the options in Vim.

The original text leaned slightly toward tabs, with the idea that one might switch to `expandtab` only if they ‘absolutely  do not want tabs’. It also gave a recommended config (`sw=4 sts=4`).
In this version of the text, I explain that tabs originally solved technical constraints ; that `vi` and Vim optimize whitespace with implicit tab compression (which can be quite surprising to new users), and that modern Vim features now make using spaces fully viable. The Go example supports the idea that tabs are now used for user preference only.

The current text has no recommended setup. Instead, the configurations are shown to illustrate valid combinations that reflect real-world use. I did not include examples with `ts!=8` to stay coherent with the narrative.
I also kept the warning to not touch `ts=8` in the `tabstop` description because I have no opinion on whether it is a still a valid recommendation or not.

Is there a particular paragraph you would like me to revise ?

Reviewer 2: As long as `&ts` is 8, you don't need to ‘deal with tabs’:  
tabs should be rendered the same in Vim and elsewhere.  The  
question (currently without a written answer) is why this is  
a configurable option.

Adopting using spaces throughout unless tabs are *required*  
in order to contain code within an 80 or other column margin  
is acceptable, provided that 2- or 4-space incrementally  
indented code continues to be legible.  Still, we should not  
dissuade people from using tabs if this is what they want to  
use or supposed to use to comply with style guidelines of  
a project they work on.  Any reasonable column margin can  
appear too narrow every now and then for code that may be  
set flush with the first column; and it is no secret that  
deeply nested statements are often refactored and rewritten  
as stand-alone procedures.

(Links are missing to sources that corroborate the reported  
design decisions made by other people.)

Author: Teleprinters had tab stops that could be adjusted. Also in the  [IBM documentation](https://www.ibm.com/docs/es/iis/11.3.0?topic=functions-printerr-statement) one can read
> The default tab stop setting is 10 characters

Terminals and punchcards were 80 columns wide, so both values of `ts=8` and `ts=10` made sense.

I agree, the docs should not dissuade people; using only tabs is the default configuration in Vim. As I wrote, I am not even sure dissuading them from changing `tabstop=8` is the correct thing to do. Especially since today many Go devs will definitely want `ts=4` and that's fine.

I am not sure about what you have in mind regarding links. Would you like me to provide references in this PR for you to review, or do you want to see references being inserted directly into the docs ?

I rewrote the JUST SPACES paragraph.

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/vim/vim/blob/879119f185ecdbe3fae156eaf473966890213482/runtime/doc/usr_30.txt#L414-L422

This is plausible.  Do you have a source that supports the  
notion that file size reduction was key to promoting using  
tabs for indentation as the general tenor of your historical  
compendium implies?  Without syntax highlighting back in the  
day, would you still prefer narrower indentation?

Author: I would start with this writing from Jamie Zawinski : [Tabs versus Spaces: An Eternal Holy War.](https://www.jwz.org/doc/tabs-vs-spaces.html)

Reviewer 3: > https://github.com/vim/vim/blob/879119f185ecdbe3fae156eaf473966890213482/runtime/doc/usr_30.txt#L414-L422
> 
> This is plausible. Do you have a source that supports the notion that file size reduction was key to promoting using tabs for indentation as the general tenor of your historical compendium implies?

Even though indent was generally 2 spaces, Bram used to ask for the runtime files to be processed with `:retab! 8` to reduce file sizes.  Most of the column alignment was done with `<Tab>` for the same reason and you can still see the results of this thinking in many runtime file headers that align the values with a `<Tab>` even when that introduces unnecessary whitespace.

	/"[^"\t]*\t[^"]*"

> It's recommended not to actual ^I characters inside a string.  Replace them

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's recommended not to use actual tab characters inside a string.  Replace them
```
